--- PAGE 1 ---
CS224n: Natural Language Processing with Deep
Learning 1 1 Course Instructors: Christopher
Manning, Richard SocherLecture Notes: Part II
Word Vectors II: GloVe, Evaluation and Training 2 2 Authors: Rohit Mundra, Emma Peng,
Richard Socher, Ajay Sohmshetty,
Amita KamathWinter 2019
Keyphrases: Global Vectors for Word Representation (GloVe). In-
trinsic and extrinsic evaluations. Effect of hyperparameters on anal-
ogy evaluation tasks. Correlation of human judgment with word
vector distances. Dealing with ambiguity in word using contexts.
Window classiﬁcation.
This set of notes ﬁrst introduces the GloVe model for training
word vectors. Then it extends our discussion of word vectors (in-
terchangeably called word embeddings) by seeing how they can be
evaluated intrinsically and extrinsically. As we proceed, we discuss
the example of word analogies as an intrinsic evaluation technique
and how it can be used to tune word embedding techniques. We then
discuss training model weights/parameters and word vectors for ex-
trinsic tasks. Lastly we motivate artiﬁcial neural networks as a class
of models for natural language processing tasks.
1 Global Vectors for Word Representation (GloVe)3 3 This section is based on the GloVe
paper by Pennington et al.:
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2014.
GloVe: Global Vectors for Word Repre-
sentation
1.1 Comparison with Previous Methods
So far, we have looked at two main classes of methods to ﬁnd word
embeddings. The ﬁrst set are count-based and rely on matrix factor-
ization (e.g. LSA, HAL). While these methods effectively leverage
global statistical information, they are primarily used to capture
word similarities and do poorly on tasks such as word analogy, indi-
cating a sub-optimal vector space structure. The other set of methods
are shallow window-based (e.g. the skip-gram and the CBOW mod-
els), which learn word embeddings by making predictions in local
context windows. These models demonstrate the capacity to capture
complex linguistic patterns beyond word similarity, but fail to make
use of the global co-occurrence statistics. GloVe:
• Using global statistics to predict the
probability of word j appearing in
the context of word i with a least
squares objective
In comparison, GloVe consists of a weighted least squares model
that trains on global word-word co-occurrence counts and thus
makes efﬁcient use of statistics. The model produces a word vector
space with meaningful sub-structure. It shows state-of-the-art per-
formance on the word analogy task, and outperforms other current
methods on several word similarity tasks.

--- PAGE 2 ---
cs224n : natural language processing with deep learning lecture notes : part ii
word vectors ii : glove , evaluation and training 2
1.2 Co-occurrence Matrix
Co-occurrence Matrix:
• X: word-word co-occurrence matrix
• Xij: number of times word j occur in
the context of word i
• Xi = ∑k Xik: the number of times
any word k appears in the context of
word i
• Pij = P(wj|wi) =
Xij
Xi
: the probability
of j appearing in the context of word
i
Let X denote the word-word co-occurrence matrix, where Xij indi-
cates the number of times word j occur in the context of word i. Let
Xi = ∑k Xik be the number of times any word k appears in the con-
text of word i. Finally, let Pij = P(wj|wi) =
Xij
Xi
be the probability of j
appearing in the context of word i.
Populating this matrix requires a single pass through the entire
corpus to collect the statistics. For large corpora, this pass can be
computationally expensive, but it is a one-time up-front cost.
1.3 Least Squares Objective
Recall that for the skip-gram model, we use softmax to compute the
probability of word j appears in the context of word i:
Qij =
exp(⃗uT
j ⃗vi)
∑W
w=1 exp(⃗uTw⃗vi)
Training proceeds in an on-line, stochastic fashion, but the implied
global cross-entropy loss can be calculated as:
J =− ∑
i∈corpus
∑
j∈context (i)
log Qij
As the same words i and j can appear multiple times in the corpus,
it is more efﬁcient to ﬁrst group together the same values for i and j:
J =−
W
∑
i=1
W
∑
j=1
Xij log Qij
where the value of co-occurring frequency is given by the co-
occurrence matrix X. One signiﬁcant drawback of the cross-entropy
loss is that it requires the distribution Q to be properly normalized,
which involves the expensive summation over the entire vocabulary.
Instead, we use a least square objective in which the normalization
factors in P and Q are discarded:
ˆJ =
W
∑
i=1
W
∑
j=1
Xi( ˆPij− ˆQij )2
where ˆPij = Xij and ˆQij = exp(⃗uT
j ⃗vi) are the unnormalized
distributions. This formulation introduces a new problem – Xij often
takes on very large values and makes the optimization difﬁcult. An
effective change is to minimize the squared error of the logarithms of
ˆP and ˆQ:

--- PAGE 3 ---
cs224n : natural language processing with deep learning lecture notes : part ii
word vectors ii : glove , evaluation and training 3
ˆJ =
W
∑
i=1
W
∑
j=1
Xi(log( ˆP)ij− log( ˆQij ))2
=
W
∑
i=1
W
∑
j=1
Xi(⃗uT
j ⃗vi− log Xij )2
Another observation is that the weighting factor Xi is not guaran-
teed to be optimal. Instead, we introduce a more general weighting
function, which we are free to take to depend on the context word as
well:
ˆJ =
W
∑
i=1
W
∑
j=1
f (Xij )(⃗uT
j ⃗vi− log Xij )2
1.4 Conclusion
In conclusion, the GloVe model efﬁciently leverages global statistical
information by training only on the nonzero elements in a word-
word co-occurrence matrix, and produces a vector space with mean-
ingful sub-structure. It consistently outperforms word2vec on the
word analogy task, given the same corpus, vocabulary, window size,
and training time. It achieves better results faster, and also obtains
the best results irrespective of speed.
2 Evaluation of Word Vectors
So far, we have discussed methods such as the Word2Vec and GloVe
methods to train and discover latent vector representations of natural
language words in a semantic space. In this section, we discuss how
we can quantitatively evaluate the quality of word vectors produced
by such techniques.
2.1 Intrinsic Evaluation
Intrinsic evaluation of word vectors is the evaluation of a set of word
vectors generated by an embedding technique (such as Word 2Vec or
GloVe) on speciﬁc intermediate subtasks (such as analogy comple-
tion). These subtasks are typically simple and fast to compute and
thereby allow us to help understand the system used to generate the
word vectors. An intrinsic evaluation should typically return to us a
number that indicates the performance of those word vectors on the
evaluation subtask.
Figure 1: The left subsystem (red)
being expensive to train is modiﬁed by
substituting with a simpler subsystem
(green) for intrinsic evaluation.
Motivation: Let us consider an example where our ﬁnal goal
is to create a question answering system which uses word vectors

--- PAGE 4 ---
cs224n : natural language processing with deep learning lecture notes : part ii
word vectors ii : glove , evaluation and training 4
as inputs. One approach of doing so would be to train a machine
learning system that:
1. Takes words as inputs
2. Converts them to word vectors
3. Uses word vectors as inputs for an elaborate machine learning
system
4. Maps the output word vectors by this system back to natural
language words
5. Produces words as answers
Intrinsic evaluation:
• Evaluation on a speciﬁc, intermedi-
ate task
• Fast to compute performance
• Helps understand subsystem
• Needs positive correlation with real
task to determine usefulness
Of course, in the process of making such a state-of-the-art question-
answering system, we will need to create optimal word-vector repre-
sentations since they are used in downstream subsystems (such as
deep neural networks). To do this in practice, we will need to tune
many hyperparameters in the Word2Vec subsystem (such as the
dimension of the word vector representation). While the idealistic
approach is to retrain the entire system after any parametric changes
in the Word2Vec subsystem, this is impractical from an engineering
standpoint because the machine learning system (in step 3) is typi-
cally a deep neural network with millions of parameters that takes
very long to train. In such a situation, we would want to come up
with a simple intrinsic evaluation technique which can provide a
measure of "goodness" of the word to word vector subsystem. Ob-
viously, a requirement is that the intrinsic evaluation has a positive
correlation with the ﬁnal task performance.
2.2 Extrinsic Evaluation
Extrinsic evaluation:
• Is the evaluation on a real task
• Can be slow to compute perfor-
mance
• Unclear if subsystem is the prob-
lem, other subsystems, or internal
interactions
• If replacing subsystem improves
performance, the change is likely
good
Extrinsic evaluation of word vectors is the evaluation of a set of word
vectors generated by an embedding technique on the real task at
hand. These tasks are typically elaborate and slow to compute. Using
our example from above, the system which allows for the evalua-
tion of answers from questions is the extrinsic evaluation system.
Typically, optimizing over an underperforming extrinsic evaluation
system does not allow us to determine which speciﬁc subsystem is at
fault and this motivates the need for intrinsic evaluation.
2.3 Intrinsic Evaluation Example: Word Vector Analogies
A popular choice for intrinsic evaluation of word vectors is its per-
formance in completing word vector analogies. In a word vector
analogy, we are given an incomplete analogy of the form:

--- PAGE 5 ---
cs224n : natural language processing with deep learning lecture notes : part ii
word vectors ii : glove , evaluation and training 5
a : b : : c : ? Note: We see that word vectors in-
corporate meaning in cosine distance
between words. They also incorpo-
rate meaning in different dimensions:
for example, "nokia" might be close
to "samsung" in some dimension for
the reason that they are both electron-
ics companies, but might be close to
"ﬁnland" in another dimension for a
different reason, that Nokia is a Finnish
company.
Note: Interesting results can be seen
when word vectors are cast down to 2
dimensions (using PCA) and graphed:
similar words cluster together. How-
ever, it is important to remember that
a signiﬁcant portion of spatial infor-
mation is lost during dimensionality
reduction; thus complex relations be-
tween words as described in the Nokia
example above may not emerge.
The intrinsic evaluation system then identiﬁes the word vector
which maximizes the cosine similarity:
d = argmax
i
(xb− xa + xc)Txi
∥xb− xa + xc∥
This metric has an intuitive interpretation. Ideally, we want xb− xa =
xd− xc (For instance, queen – king = actress – actor). This implies
that we want xb− xa + xc = xd. Thus we identify the vector xd which
maximizes the normalized dot-product between the two word vectors
(i.e. cosine similarity).
Using intrinsic evaluation techniques such as word-vector analo-
gies should be handled with care (keeping in mind various aspects of
the corpus used for pre-training). For instance, consider analogies of
the form:
City 1 : State containing City 1 : : City 2 : State containing City 2
Input Result Produced
Chicago : Illinois : : Houston Texas
Chicago : Illinois : : Philadelphia Pennsylvania
Chicago : Illinois : : Phoenix Arizona
Chicago : Illinois : : Dallas Texas
Chicago : Illinois : : Jacksonville Florida
Chicago : Illinois : : Indianapolis Indiana
Chicago : Illinois : : Austin Texas
Chicago : Illinois : : Detroit Michigan
Chicago : Illinois : : Memphis Tennessee
Chicago : Illinois : : Boston Massachusetts
Table 1: Here are semantic word vector
analogies (intrinsic evaluation) that may
suffer from different cities having the
same name
In many cases above, there are multiple cities/towns/villages with
the same name across the US. Thus, many states would qualify as the
right answer. For instance, there are at least 10 places in the US called
Phoenix and thus, Arizona need not be the only correct response. Let
us now consider analogies of the form:
Capital City 1 : Country 1 : : Capital City 2 : Country 2
In many of the cases above, the resulting city produced by this
task has only been the capital in the recent past. For instance, prior to
1997 the capital of Kazakhstan was Almaty. Thus, we can anticipate
other issues if our corpus is dated.
The previous two examples demonstrated semantic testing using
word vectors. We can also test syntax using word vector analogies.
The following intrinsic evaluation tests the word vectors’ ability to
capture the notion of superlative adjectives:
Similarly, the intrinsic evaluation shown below tests the word
vectors’ ability to capture the notion of past tense:

--- PAGE 6 ---
cs224n : natural language processing with deep learning lecture notes : part ii
word vectors ii : glove , evaluation and training 6
Input Result Produced
Abuja : Nigeria : : Accra Ghana
Abuja : Nigeria : : Algiers Algeria
Abuja : Nigeria : : Amman Jordan
Abuja : Nigeria : : Ankara Turkey
Abuja : Nigeria : : Antananarivo Madagascar
Abuja : Nigeria : : Apia Samoa
Abuja : Nigeria : : Ashgabat Turkmenistan
Abuja : Nigeria : : Asmara Eritrea
Abuja : Nigeria : : Astana Kazakhstan
Table 2: Here are semantic word vector
analogies (intrinsic evaluation) that may
suffer from countries having different
capitals at different points in time
Input Result Produced
bad : worst : : big biggest
bad : worst : : bright brightest
bad : worst : : cold coldest
bad : worst : : cool coolest
bad : worst : : dark darkest
bad : worst : : easy easiest
bad : worst : : fast fastest
bad : worst : : good best
bad : worst : : great greatest
Table 3: Here are syntactic word vector
analogies (intrinsic evaluation) that test
the notion of superlative adjectives
2.4 Intrinsic Evaluation Tuning Example: Analogy Evaluations
Some parameters we might consider
tuning for a word embedding technique
on intrinsic evaluation tasks are:
• Dimension of word vectors
• Corpus size
• Corpus souce/type
• Context window size
• Context symmetry
Can you think of other hyperparame-
ters tunable at this stage?
We now explore some of the hyperparameters in word vector em-
bedding techniques (such as Word2Vec and GloVe) that can be tuned
using an intrinsic evaluation system (such as an analogy completion
system). Let us ﬁrst see how different methods for creating word-
vector embeddings have performed (in recent research work) under
the same hyperparameters on an analogy evaluation task:

--- PAGE 7 ---
cs224n : natural language processing with deep learning lecture notes : part ii
word vectors ii : glove , evaluation and training 7
Input Result Produced
dancing : danced : : decreasing decreased
dancing : danced : : describing described
dancing : danced : : enhancing enhanced
dancing : danced : : falling fell
dancing : danced : : feeding fed
dancing : danced : : ﬂying ﬂew
dancing : danced : : generating generated
dancing : danced : : going went
dancing : danced : : hiding hid
dancing : danced : : hitting hit
Table 4: Here are syntactic word vector
analogies (intrinsic evaluation) that test
the notion of past tense
Model Dimension Size Semantics Syntax Total
ivLBL 100 1.5B 55.9 50.1 53.2
HPCA 100 1.6B 4.2 16.4 10.8
GloVE 100 1.6B 67.5 54.3 60.3
SG 300 1B 61 61 61
CBOW 300 1.6B 16.1 52.6 36.1
vLBL 300 1.5B 54.2 64.8 60.0
ivLBL 300 1.5B 65.2 63.0 64.0
GloVe 300 1.6B 80.8 61.5 70.3
SVD 300 6B 6.3 8.1 7.3
SVD-S 300 6B 36.7 46.6 42.1
SVD-L 300 6B 56.6 63.0 60.1
CBOW 300 6B 63.6 67.4 65.7
SG 300 6B 73.0 66.0 69.1
GloVe 300 6B 77.4 67.0 71.7
CBOW 1000 6B 57.3 68.9 63.7
SG 1000 6B 66.1 65.1 65.6
SVD-L 300 42B 38.4 58.2 49.2
GloVe 300 42B 81.9 69.3 75.0
Table 5: Here we compare the perfor-
mance of different models under the
use of different hyperparameters and
datasets

--- PAGE 8 ---
cs224n : natural language processing with deep learning lecture notes : part ii
word vectors ii : glove , evaluation and training 8
Inspecting the above table, we can make 3 primary observations:
• Performance is heavily dependent on the model used for word
embedding:
This is an expected result since different methods try embedding
words to vectors using fundamentally different properties (such as
co-occurrence count, singular vectors, etc.) Implementation Tip: A window size
of 8 around each center word typically
works well for GloVe embeddings
Figure 2: Here we see how training
time improves training performance
and helps squeeze the last few perfor-
mance.
• Performance increases with larger corpus sizes:
This happens because of the experience an embedding technique
gains with more examples it sees. For instance, an analogy com-
pletion example will produce incorrect results if it has not encoun-
tered the test words previously.
• Performance is lower for extremely low dimensional word vec-
tors:
Lower dimensional word vectors are not able to capture the dif-
ferent meanings of the different words in the corpus. This can be
viewed as a high bias problem where our model complexity is too
low. For instance, let us consider the words "king", "queen", "man",
"woman". Intuitively, we would need to use two dimensions such
as "gender" and "leadership" to encode these into 2-bit word vec-
tors. Any lower would fail to capture semantic differences between
the four words.
Extremely high dimensional vectors:
Intuitively, it would seem that these
vectors would capture noise in the
corpus that doesn’t allow generaliza-
tion, i.e. resulting in high variance, but
Yin et al . show in O n the Dimen -
sionality of Word Embedding that
skip-gram and GloVe are robust to this
over-ﬁtting.
Figure 3 demonstrates how accuracy has been shown to improve
with larger corpus.
Figure 3: Here we see how performance
improves with data size.Figure 4 demonstrates how other hyperparameters have been
shown to affect the accuracies using GloVe.

--- PAGE 9 ---
cs224n : natural language processing with deep learning lecture notes : part ii
word vectors ii : glove , evaluation and training 9
Figure 4: We see how accuracies vary
with vector dimension and context
window size for GloVe2.5 Intrinsic Evaluation Example: Correlation Evaluation
Another simple way to evaluate the quality of word vectors is by
asking humans to assess the similarity between two words on a ﬁxed
scale (say 0-10) and then comparing this with the cosine similarity
between the corresponding word vectors. This has been done on
various datasets that contain human judgement survey data.
Model Size WS353 MC RG SCWS RW
SVD 6B 35.3 35.1 42.5 38.3 25.6
SVD-S 6B 56.5 71.5 71.0 53.6 34.7
SVD-L 6B 65.7 72.7 75.1 56.5 37.0
CBOW 6B 57.2 65.6 68.2 57.0 32.5
SG 6B 62.8 65.2 69.7 58.1 37.2
GloVe 6B 65.8 72.7 77.8 53.9 38.1
SVD-L 42B 74.0 76.4 74.1 58.3 39.9
GloVe 42B 75.9 83.6 82.9 59.6 47.8
CBOW 100B 68.4 79.6 75.4 59.4 45.5
Table 6: Here we see the correlations be-
tween of word vector similarities using
different embedding techniques with
different human judgment datasets
2.6 Further Reading: Dealing With Ambiguity
One might wonder how we handle the situation where we want to
capture the same word with different vectors for its different uses in
natural language. For instance, "run" is both a noun and a verb and
is used and interpreted differently based on the context. I mproving
Word Representations Via Global Context And Multi -
ple Word Prototypes (H uang et al , 2012 ) describes how such
cases can also be handled in NLP . The essence of the method is the
following:
1. Gather ﬁxed size context windows of all occurrences of the word
(for instance, 5 before and 5 after)
2. Each context is represented by a weighted average of the context
words’ vectors (using idf-weighting)

--- PAGE 10 ---
cs224n : natural language processing with deep learning lecture notes : part ii
word vectors ii : glove , evaluation and training 10
3. Apply spherical k-means to cluster these context representations.
4. Finally, each word occurrence is re-labeled to its associated cluster
and is used to train the word representation for that cluster.
For a more rigorous treatment on this topic, one should refer to
the original paper.
3 Training for Extrinsic Tasks
We have so far focused on intrinsic tasks and emphasized their
importance in developing a good word embedding technique. Of
course, the end goal of most real-world problems is to use the result-
ing word vectors for some other extrinsic task. Here we discuss the
general approach for handling extrinsic tasks.
3.1 Problem Formulation
Most NLP extrinsic tasks can be formulated as classiﬁcation tasks.
For instance, given a sentence, we can classify the sentence to have
positive, negative or neutral sentiment. Similarly, in named-entity
recognition (NER), given a context and a central word, we want
to classify the central word to be one of many classes. For the in-
put, "Jim bought 300 shares of Acme Corp. in 2006", we would
like a classiﬁed output "[Jim] Person bought 300 shares of [Acme
Corp.]Organization in [2006]Time."
Figure 5: We can classify word vectors
using simple linear decision boundaries
such as the one shown here ( 2-D word
vectors) using techniques such as
logistic regression and SVMs
For such problems, we typically begin with a training set of the
form:
{x(i), y(i)}N
1
where x(i) is a d-dimensional word vector generated by some word
embedding technique and y(i) is a C-dimensional one-hot vector
which indicates the labels we wish to eventually predict (sentiments,
other words, named entities, buy/sell decisions, etc.).
In typical machine learning tasks, we usually hold input data and
target labels ﬁxed and train weights using optimization techniques
(such as gradient descent, L-BFGS, Newton’s method, etc.). In NLP
applications however, we introduce the idea of retraining the input
word vectors when we train for extrinsic tasks. Let us discuss when
and why we should consider doing this. Implementation Tip: Word vector
retraining should be considered for
large training datasets. For small
datasets, retraining word vectors will
likely worsen performance.
3.2 Retraining Word Vectors
As we have discussed so far, the word vectors we use for extrinsic
tasks are initialized by optimizing them over a simpler intrinsic task.
In many cases, these pretrained word vectors are a good proxy for

--- PAGE 11 ---
cs224n : natural language processing with deep learning lecture notes : part ii
word vectors ii : glove , evaluation and training 11
optimal word vectors for the extrinsic task and they perform well
at the extrinsic task. However, it is also possible that the pretrained
word vectors could be trained further (i.e. retrained) using the extrin-
sic task this time to perform better. However, retraining word vectors
can be risky.
Figure 6: Here, we see that the words
"Telly", "TV", and "Television" are clas-
siﬁed correctly before retraining. "Telly"
and "TV" are present in the extrinsic
task training set while "Television" is
only present in the test set.
If we retrain word vectors using the extrinsic task, we need to en-
sure that the training set is large enough to cover most words from
the vocabulary. This is because Word2Vec or GloVe produce semanti-
cally related words to be located in the same part of the word space.
When we retrain these words over a small set of the vocabulary, these
words are shifted in the word space and as a result, the performance
over the ﬁnal task could actually reduce. Let us explore this idea
further using an example. Consider the pretrained vectors to be in a
two dimensional space as shown in Figure 6. Here, we see that the
word vectors are classiﬁed correctly on some extrinsic classiﬁcation
task. Now, if we retrain only two of those vectors because of a limited
training set size, then we see in Figure 7 that one of the words gets
misclassiﬁed because the boundary shifts as a result of word vector
updates.
Thus, word vectors should not be retrained if the training data set
is small. If the training set is large, retraining may improve perfor-
mance.
Figure 7: Here, we see that the words
"Telly" and "TV" are classiﬁed correctly
after training, but "Television" is not
since it was not present in the training
set.
3.3 Softmax Classiﬁcation and Regularization
Let us consider using the Softmax classiﬁcation function which has
the form:
p(yj = 1|x) = exp(Wj·x)
∑C
c=1 exp(Wc·x)
Here, we calculate the probability of word vector x being in class j.
Using the Cross-entropy loss function, we calculate the loss of such a
training example as:
−
C
∑
j=1
yj log(p(yj = 1|x)) =−
C
∑
j=1
yj log
( exp(Wj·x)
∑C
c=1 exp(Wc·x)
)
Of course, the above summation will be a sum over (C− 1) zero
values since yj is 1 only at a single index (at least for now) implying
that x belongs to only 1 correct class. Thus, let us deﬁne k to be the
index of the correct class. Thus, we can now simplify our loss to be:
− log
( exp(Wk·x)
∑C
c=1 exp(Wc·x)
)
We can then extend the above loss to a dataset of N points:
−
N
∑
i=1
log
( exp(Wk(i)·x(i))
∑C
c=1 exp(Wc·x(i))
)

--- PAGE 12 ---
cs224n : natural language processing with deep learning lecture notes : part ii
word vectors ii : glove , evaluation and training 12
The only difference above is that k(i) is now a function that returns
the correct class index for example x(i).
Let us now try to estimate the number of parameters that would
be updated if we consider training both, model weights ( W), as well
word vectors (x). We know that a simple linear decision boundary
would require a model that takes in at least one d-dimensional input
word vector and produces a distribution over C classes. Thus, to
update the model weights, we would be updating C· d parameters.
If we update the word vectors for every word in the vocabulary V
as well, then we would be updating as many as |V| word vectors,
each of which is d-dimensional. Thus, the total number of parameters
would be as many as C· d +|V|· d for a simple linear classiﬁer:
∇θ J(θ) =


∇W·1
...
∇W·d
∇xaardvark
...
∇xzebra


This is an extremely large number of parameters considering how
simple the model’s decision boundary is - such a large number of
parameters is highly prone to overﬁtting.
To reduce overﬁtting risk, we introduce a regularization term
which poses the Bayesian belief that the parameters ( θ) should be
small is magnitude (i.e. close to zero):
−
N
∑
i=1
log
( exp(Wk(i)·x(i))
∑C
c=1 exp(Wc·x(i))
)
+ λ
C·d+|V|·d
∑
k=1
θ2
k
Minimizing the above cost function reduces the likelihood of the
parameters taking on extremely large values just to ﬁt the training set
well and may improve generalization if the relative objective weight
λ is tuned well. The idea of regularization becomes even more of a
requirement once we explore more complex models (such as Neural
Networks) which have far more parameters.
3.4 Window Classiﬁcation
 Figure 8: Here, we see a central word
with a symmetric window of length 2.
Such context may help disambiguate
between the place Paris and the name
Paris.
So far we have primarily explored the idea of predicting in extrinsic
tasks using a single word vector x. In reality, this is hardly done be-
cause of the nature of natural languages. Natural languages tend to
use the same word for very different meanings and we typically need
to know the context of the word usage to discriminate between mean-
ings. For instance, if you were asked to explain to someone what

--- PAGE 13 ---
cs224n : natural language processing with deep learning lecture notes : part ii
word vectors ii : glove , evaluation and training 13
"to sanction" meant, you would immediately realize that depending
on the context "to sanction" could mean "to permit" or "to punish".
In most situations, we tend to use a sequence of words as input to
the model. A sequence is a central word vector preceded and suc-
ceeded by context word vectors. The number of words in the context
is also known as the context window size and varies depending on
the problem being solved. Generally, narrower window sizes lead to
better performance in syntactic tests while wider windows lead to
better performance in semantic tests. Generally, narrower window sizes lead
to better performance in syntactic tests
while wider windows lead to better
performance in semantic tests.
In order to modify the previously discussed Softmax model to use
windows of words for classiﬁcation, we would simply substitute x(i)
with x(i)
window in the following manner:
x(i)
window =


x(i−2)
x(i−1)
x(i)
x(i+1)
x(i+2)


As a result, when we evaluate the gradient of the loss with respect
to the words, we will receive gradients for the word vectors:
δwindow =


∇x(i−2)
∇x(i−1)
∇x(i)
∇x(i+1)
∇x(i+2)


The gradient will of course need to be distributed to update the
corresponding word vectors in implementation.
3.5 Non-linear Classiﬁers
Figure 9: Here, we see that many exam-
ples are wrongly classiﬁed even though
the best linear decision boundary is
chosen. This is due linear decision
boundaries have limited model capacity
for this dataset.
We now introduce the need for non-linear classiﬁcation models such
as neural networks. We see in Figure 9 that a linear classiﬁer mis-
classiﬁes many datapoints. Using a non-linear decision boundary as
shown in Figure 10, we manage to classify all training points accu-
rately. Although oversimpliﬁed, this is a classic case demonstrating
the need for non-linear decision boundaries. In the next set of notes,
we study neural networks as a class of non-linear models that have
performed particularly well in deep learning applications.
Figure 10: Here, we see that the non-
linear decision boundary allows for
much better classiﬁcation of datapoints.
